Design decisions for subpoly domain:

From the apper we know that we must store Intervals and Affeq. For implementation it also seems intelliget to store slack variables seperatley. We therefore resort to the type t being:

type t = {
affeq: affeq;
intervals: interval_map;
slacks: slack_map;
} [@@deriving eq, ord, hash]

Where we define Intervals as any module implementing the interval interface, and we then map variables to their corresponding interval. Affeq is defined by a sparse matrix, and slacks are stored as so:

type slack_expr = {
terms: (Var.t \* Mpqf.t) list;
const: Mpqf.t;
} [@@deriving eq, ord, hash]

type slack = {
expr: slack_expr;
info: interval;
} [@@deriving eq, ord, hash]

Meaning we have a info field, as required by the paper, storeing the linexp and a constant. Then in the slap type we also store a intarval to the correspoinding slack variable.

Intervals are pretty self explanitory except the leq definition, which is still up for debpate if it should return an interval or a boolean.

Finally for the Subpoly Domain module implemented in subPolyhedradomain. We Have a linexp module which represents linear expressions. This exposes an important function for normalization. We do this by taking the first constant of our linexp and multiplying every factor by 1/factor. This creates a normalized expression for any multuplicities of that interval.

For the linexp definition, i decided to use type t as:

type linexpr = {
terms: (Var.t \* Mpqf.t) list;
const: Mpqf.t;
}

since i had issues making them sparse vecs. This is because at parse time i didnt know what indicies corresponded to what program vars, fully representing the expression so and then converting when env was known mitigated some bugs i had.

Since the intervals live outside the linexp function we need to export the factor together with the normalized linexp when calling normalize. With this value we then adjust the interval to fit correspondingly.

The assert constraint function takes a c exp, and a domain. With this it parses and creates a linexp, and calculates adjusted expressions and intervals, which are then both inserted into our subpoly domain. (which is currently unimplemented).

Note on domain D, many functions such as assign vars parallel, and practically the entirety of slack managment, were generated by AI when i wanted to do the first moke test, they are definitley to be revisited and may be error prone.

Since our slack variables are registered in envirnment with special names, such as subpoly_slack. I dont think it necessary to reorder the affeq matrix where we f.x. push all slacks to one side. The current reverse lookup is already computationally efficient. (Or maybe im wrong about this.)
